h1. Alithia Engine TODO

Some tasks that need to be done in Alithia Engine. This file will be updated frequently.

h1. Table of contents

{toc}

h1. Core engine

h2. Source

* Cleanup the engine source code (replace use of int with size_t where appropriate for example)

h2. World

* Add particle emitting entities
* Entities can touch more than one cluster: add cluster list to entities and update motion.c to use that for faster processing

h2. Editing

* Add "snap to grid" key for lights and entities
* Add "drop to ground" key for entities
* Add entity and light delete key
* Add "fullbright lightmap" key
* Add "Create" menu. Needs popup menus from below.
** Add "Create light" command
** Add "Create entity" popup with available entities
* Add copy/paste functionality
* Add save/load clipboard functionality for prefabbing (needs copy/paste)

h2. Models

* Add animation in models
* Make model shadow optional

h2. Resources

* Add resource loading, tagging, preloading, etc
* Add support for Alithia Package files

h2. GUI

* Add popup menus
* Add listbox control

h2. Scripting

* Add LIL to Alithia Engine
* Add two separate 'libraries' for functions and a common one.
** One library for the game
** And another for the editor

h3. Game Scripting

* Add scripts to entities
* Add world triggers

h3. Editor Scripting

* Add scripting functionality for the editor

h1. Tools

h2. Exporter and models

* Add animation export for the Blender 2.5 exporter
* Write an OBJ to ALM converter for non-Blender users (low priority)
** The converter should be able to use multiple OBJ files for multiple frames
